# Project Brainstorm
#### Info BA: Shraddha KC, Katie Wang, Joseph Caraan, Chiaki Matsuno

***

## Domain of Interest
### Unemployment during the COVID-19 pandemic

### Why are you interested in this field/domain?
After discussing with the team members, COVID-19 was a topic we all were interested in researching. We chose to focus on unemployment rates as we noticed the drastic increase in unemployment as a result of the pandemic.

### What are examples of other data driven projects related to this domain?
#### Example 1: [Growth Area of Employment in Seattle](https://data.seattle.gov/Land-Base/Urban-Centers-and-Villages-Annual-Covered-Total-Em/tx2p-n544)
This dataset is the growth area of employment regarding urban centers and villages for the City of Seattle Comprehensive Plan.

#### Example 2: [COVID-19 Induced Unemployment and Mental Health](https://www.clickondetroit.com/news/national/2020/05/12/new-study-projects-68000-deaths-of-despair-among-americans-due-to-the-coronavirus-pandemic/)
Unemployment during COVID-19 has had a rippling effect on mental health. There has been a recent study initiative, by the Well Being Trust and the Robert Graham Center for Policy Studies in Family Medicine and Primary Care, revolving around possible loss of lives due to the socioeconomic impact of this pandemic.  

#### Example 3: [Inequality Impact of Unemployment](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1JYI4bzQ5ytmml_Vct8o-Zw7BqRsHKzsq/view)
There was a recent study completed on the inequality impact of the unemployment shock completed by foreign universities (University of Cambridge/Oxford). Though the research collected includes multiple countries, it is beneficial to analyze as our domain is revolving around unemployment. This gives us an idea of what chain reactions are caused by the substantial COVID-19 shock.

### What data-driven questions do you hope to answer about this domain? How can these questions be answered using data?

#### Question 1: How does the number of confirmed cases and hospitalized cases affect the unemployment rate in Washington state?
We could see if the trend of the confirmed cases in various states have affected the trend of unemployment rates over time.

#### Question 2: What impacts does the unemployment have on the US economy/job market?
We can analyze data for unemployment rates and job availability as well as projected growths of different industries to see how they correlate with one another.

#### Question 3: How has unemployment in Washington been affected and will continue to be affected by the pandemic?
By viewing the graphs and charts in the dataset, we can obtain knowledge that will help us understand how unemployment has been hit already and in which specific areas and industries.

***

## Finding Data
### Data Source 1: [COVID-19 in USA](https://www.kaggle.com/sudalairajkumar/covid19-in-usa/?select=us_states_covid19_daily.csv) by Sudalai Raj Kumar

First and foremost, we were interested in seeing the relationship between the confirmed and hospitalized cases of COVID-19 and unemployment rates in Washington state as ever since the virus began spreading, many businesses have reduced their services as a result.

#### How was the data collected or generated?
This dataset was from kaggle.com, in which the original dataset was generated by the [COVID-19 Tracking Project](https://covidtracking.com/).  

The **COVID Tracking Project** not only gathers tested numbers from CDC but also has their own volunteer to compile the number of tests, confirmed cases, hospitalizations, and patient outcomes from every US state and territory. Large institutions such as John Hopkins relies on their data for its COVID-19 Testing Insights Initiative, which brings experts and analysts together. Public sectors and press are also using their data on cases report and decision making on the policy. They update the dataset daily thus the public and the policymakers are able to get the most up to date information.

#### How many observations (rows) and features (columns) are in your data?
The Kaggle dataset includes 27 columns and 101 rows, containing data of state, current on the ventilator, hospitalized currently, in ICU currently, etc.

#### What questions (from above) can be answered using the data in this dataset?

> *How does the number of confirmed cases and hospitalized cases affect the unemployment rate in Washington state?*

The data helps us understand how the hospital equipment is used in each state and the overall cases confirmed, hence, we could further filter out the information of Washington state which is most relevant to us since we all study here. Since the dataset is updated daily, we could see the trend of how the number goes up and down in Washington state. Indeed, the trends now are all uprising.

### Data Source 2: [US Unemployment Insurance Weekly Claims](https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=b2286e8d03a74206809252a788f35b52&view=list#data) by Helen Thompson

Next was looking at data sets for unemployment insurance claims. As college students, many rely on jobs to help pay for tuition costs, house bills, additional fees for daily use etc. In addition to the usual transactions, many are also dependent upon graduation as it will be the first step for many to enter the full-time job market.

#### How was the data collected or generated?
ArcGIS is a website that relies on creating visualizations from datasets. This specific dataset was created by pooling information from the United State Department of Labor, Employment & Training Administration. The data was collected from 01/01/2020 and is being updated weekly. Because of the consistent updates, it is inevitable that there will be changes. This specific link provides a data tab and a visualization tab that creates an in-depth analysis of the unemployment rates according to each state.

#### How many observations (rows) and features (columns) are in your data?
The data tab displays 50 states, total 51 rows and 88 fields (columns/features), providing numerical values.

#### What questions (from above) can be answered using the data in this dataset?
> *What impacts does the unemployment have on the US economy/job market?*

It’s apparent that we will be able to analyze the change in the unemployment rate according to each state as the data provides updated information for every time the statistics are collected. Having this dataset would help our team understand more in the impact the changes of the unemployment rates has on society.

### Data Source 3: [Initial Claims applications for Unemployment Insurance - WA](https://public.tableau.com/profile/jeff.robinson#!/vizhome/InitialClaimsapplicationsforUnempIoymentInsurance-WA_ETA539-/Story1) by Washington Employment Security Department

Since UW is a university located in Washington, it is also probable that most students will end up with a job in the state. Hence, viewing and creating data sets that involve unemployment in Washington is beneficial as it allows us to see trends and quantitative values that could help us get a picture of how the job market will look as we approach graduation and find employment.

#### How was the data collected or generated?
I found this dataset on opendatanetwork.com, which eventually led me to data.wa.gov. This link provided me access to a Tableau report taken by the state of Washington. In the report, there are multiple graphs and charts, in which the initial claims for the past seventeen weeks had been calculated per week, per industry, and per county. The final chart displays the county and industry relationship in initial claims per week. Tableau provides a very interactive interface, so the user could manipulate the data set to their liking in order to view the data they want to see.

#### How many observations (rows) and features (columns) are in your data?
The Tableau chart has 94 rows and 40 columns containing Washington counties, Washington industries, and the number of unemployment files in each.

#### What questions (from above) can be answered using the data in this dataset?
> *How has unemployment been and will continue to be affected by the pandemic?*

The data set was generated by the state of Washington and is constantly updated meaning that this Tableau report will be different every single week moving forward. When an unemployment insurance file comes into the state, they document it and this contributes to the report. Thus far, the report has had thousands of files come in. Using the dataset, we can see what the trend has been per industry and even area and see which job markets are the least attractive coming into and out of COVID-19. We could also see the trends of unemployment, and of course right now the trend has been upwards. However, using this data we could see when the trend starts to go downwards again.
